## 3/9/23, 11:47 AM How Safe, Stable Relationships Can Prevent Toxic Stress in Children HealthyChildren.org 

## https://healthychildren.org/English/news/Pages/Safe-Stable-Relationships-Prevent-Toxic-Stress.aspx 1/2 

# How Safe, Stable Relationships Can Prevent Toxic Stress in 

# Children 

## Feeling safe, connected and supported also provides 

## children with a foundation for building resilience 

## Safe, stable, and nurturing relationships can act as a 

## powerful, protective buffer against the biological harms 

## of toxic stress on children, according to the American 

## Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). These relationships are 

## also key to building resilience--being able to bounce 

## back from adverse childhood experiences 

## (/English/healthy-living/emotional-wellness/Building

## Resilience/Pages/ACEs-Adverse-Childhood

## Experiences.aspx). When children feel connected and 

## supported in the early years, says a newly updated AAP 

## report, they are more likely to become healthy, competent and educated citizens later in life. 

## The policy statement, "Preventing Childhood Toxic Stress: Partnering With Families and Communities to Promote 

## Relational Health," is published in the August 2021 Pediatrics. The statement focuses on just how important 

## relationships and positive childhood experiences are in preventing and healing toxic stress. This policy moves away 

## from a problem-based model that focuses on a child's past adverse experiences and instead presents a positive, 

## strengths-based approach that fosters solutions at the family, community and societal levels. 

## A slow-moving public health crisis 

## The AAP calls for pediatricians, parents and policymakers to recognize toxic stress as a slow-moving public health 

## threat that can be tempered by a preventive approach aimed at developing and strengthening healthy relationships. 

## "The concept of drawing on positive relationships as a shield against the toxic stress caused by adverse experiences 

## has never been more relevant," said Andrew Garner, MD, PhD, FAAP, an author of the statement, generated by the 

## Committee on Psychosocial Aspects of Child and Family Health, the Section on Developmental and Behavioral 

## Pediatrics, and the Council on Early Childhood. 

## Forming close, healthy and nurturing bonds 

## "Over the past few years, we've experienced a socially-isolating pandemic and reckoned with centuries of structural 

## racism. We must take steps to help kids form close, healthy and nurturing bonds, whether it is within the family, 

## schools or community." 

## The AAP recommends that pediatricians prioritize the trusted, respectful relationships that they share with patients 

## and their families. They may refer families with strained relationships to evidence-based therapies, or work within 

## their communities to make those therapies available if they are not offered. 

## New research also reveals that changes in the brains of parents who experienced trauma in their own childhoods may 

## make it difficult for them to bond and nurture their children. These families can benefit from help from the 

## community and others, especially after the pandemic. 

## "Families can help children adapt to harmful experiences and adversity by modeling their own skills at resilience," 

## said Michael Yogman, MD, FAAP, an author of the report. "This may mean demonstrating how to ask for help from 

## family, friends, neighbors or others or demonstrating how to handle their own strong emotions. Caregivers do not 

## need to be perfect to help children feel safe, connected and supported." 


###### 3/9/23, 11:47 AM How Safe, Stable Relationships Can Prevent Toxic Stress in Children HealthyChildren.org 

###### https://healthychildren.org/English/news/Pages/Safe-Stable-Relationships-Prevent-Toxic-Stress.aspx 2/2 

##### The AAP recommends that pediatricians watch for, screen and address potential barriers to safe, stable, and nurturing 

##### relationships. Barriers include social determinants of health, such as inadequate housing, education inequities and 

##### food insecurity, the parents' own adverse childhood experiences, intimate partner or neighborhood violence, parental 

##### depression or substance use. 

##### The pediatrician cannot do this work alone, according to the policy statement. The AAP calls for policy makers and 

##### community leaders to learn how relational health is influenced at all levels and support programs and funding that 

##### strengthen families. This may include expanding family medical leave opportunities, increasing child tax credits, 

##### securing safe and affordable housing, supporting employment assistance and job training, promoting universal access 

##### to high-quality child care centers and schools, advancing preventive early childhood mental health services, 

##### promoting social emotional learning in schools, and expanding opportunities for playful learning in safe 

##### neighborhoods. 

### The AAP also offers recommendations for families, caregivers, teachers, coaches 

### and others, which include: 

##### Learning about positive parenting techniques and developmentally appropriate forms of play, such as shared 

##### reading, as these foster the warm relationships that enhance literacy, executive function and other core 21st 

##### century life skills. 

##### Learning how to handle their own strong emotions, so they can model this skill and be emotionally available 

##### when their children are distressed ("put your own oxygen mask on before helping others"). 

##### Considering therapy to address unresolved trauma in the caregivers' own history. Children are watching as 

##### caregivers strive to become slightly better versions of themselves each day, and the development of a "growth 

##### mind-set" is a powerful predictor of future success. 

##### Helping children understand that there is nothing wrong with having strong emotions: the challenge is helping 

##### them to channel that energy into a constructive outlet like a passion, hobby, or activity that brings them joy while 

##### at the same time building generalizable skills. 

##### Policymakers are encouraged to consider how adverse childhood experiences and toxic stress lead to long-term 

##### health problems from depression to diabetes and heart disease that are bankrupting the healthcare system. 

##### "Our nation's children are suffering both a mental health crisis and an educational challenge amid the pandemic," Dr. 

##### Yogman said. "We must seize this opportunity and make sure that all children have someone they can turn to, that 

##### they can trust within a consistent, positive and nurturing relationship. This benefits our children, our society and our 

##### future." 

##### Additional resources include an AAP policy statement and clinical report on, "Trauma-Informed Care in Child Health 

#### System," also published in the August 2021 Pediatrics. 

## More information 

##### Creating Positive Experiences for Your Infant (/English/healthy-living/emotional-wellness/Building

##### Resilience/Pages/Creating-Positive-Experiences-for-Your-Infant.aspx) 

##### Creating Positive Experiences for Toddlers & Preschool-Age Children (/English/healthy-living/emotional

##### wellness/Building-Resilience/Pages/Creating-Positive-Experiences-for-Toddlers-%26-Preschool-Age

##### Children.aspx) 

##### Creating Positive Experiences for School Age Children (/English/healthy-living/emotional-wellness/Building

##### Resilience/Pages/Creating-Positive-Experiences-for-School-Age-Children.aspx) 

##### Creating Positive Experiences for Teens (/English/healthy-living/emotional-wellness/Building

##### Resilience/Pages/Creating-Positive-Experiences-for-Teens.aspx) 

##### Childhood Adversity: Buffering Stress & Building Resilience (/English/healthy-living/emotional

##### wellness/Building-Resilience/Pages/ACEs-Adverse-Childhood-Experiences.aspx) 

##### Published 7/26/2021 12:00 AM 

##### Source American Academy of Pediatrics (Copyright © 2021) 

###### Back to Top 


